- [Instructor] Let us understand what wild cards are
in generics.
So far, the code that we have written in generics
in our box application, always accesses the type parameter.
So, we wrote a class box of T,
and T is the type parameter there.
We also defined bounded types.
But even in that case,
we always had an access to the type parameter.
But in certain situations
you can replace that type parameter
with just a question mark like that.
So, you have the angle brackets,
and in between those, you mentioned the question mark.
This is called the wildcard operator,
and it is used to indicate any unknown type,
which means if you have a method
that has a parameter consisting of only the wildcard,
then you can invoke the method using any type.
Wildcards can be applied for types of parameters,
fields, or local variables.
You can also use them on your return types.
Although this is allowed,
it is always a best programming practice
to be very specific when you write your code.
You cannot apply wildcards for sure, in certain situations.
The first one, is generic type instantiation.
Let's go to the IDE and see how.
On our package, let's create a new class
and call this TestWildcards.
And I'll write the main method.
And when you say generic type instantiation,
you want to instantiate a generic class.
So, we have a box class,
let's go ahead and create an instance.
I'll say new box, and this time,
in between the angle brackets
I'll mention the wildcard character
followed by the constructor call.
If I do this, I get a compilation problem
stating that the wildcard type question mark
cannot be instantiated directly.
So, this is not possible.
I'm going to comment this line of code,
otherwise our code will not compile.
The other place where you cannot use wildcards,
is generic method invocation.
Let's see how.
On the next line,
I will invoke the BoxUtils empty box method, like that.
And now we know that in order to find out
what kind of empty box was returned out of this invocation,
we can always declare that variable using the var keyword.
Which is used to create a local variable.
So let's say var box equal to BoxUtils.emptyBox.
And when we do this,
the intellij quickly hints us that it is box of boxable.
However, I want to invoke this method
with the wildcard argument.
So, I can use the type witness.
So, just before the method name
I'm going to insert the pair of angle brackets,
and in between I'll mention the question mark.
If I do that, I get a compilation problem stating
that it is an unexpected wildcard.
So, you cannot do this as well.
I'll comment out this line.
The other place where you cannot use wildcards,
is supertypes.
Let's say on my TestWildcards class on line number 3.
I'll hypothetically extend the Box class.
And for this, I mention the wildcard character.
The moment I do this,
it tells me that there is no wildcard expected here.
So, it doesn't even work with supertypes.
Let's comment this line of code,
copy this line again, paste it on line number 4
and correct the definition of the TestWildcards class.
The commented lines in this file are merely written,
so that you can have a reference to it,
to understand which are the places
where you cannot use wildcards.
There are three way is to use wildcards.
Unbounded, upper bounded, and lower bounded.
Let's first look at unbounded wildcards.
These are specified using only the wildcard operator,
which is the question mark.
And it is used in situations
where you do not want a reference to your type parameter
to carry out any logic for your method for example.
Even if your method implements bounds,
you have no reason to access the bound's fields or methods.
The best example for using unbounded wildcards
would be the utility method of counting the items in the box
that we have in a box application.
Let's go back to the code and find out
how we can use unbounded wildcards on that utility method.
So, let's go to BoxUtils, and if you see on line number 5,
we have a method which says get count of items
and the parameter is box of T.
We are now going to change this method
to incorporate the unbounded wildcard usage
for our method parameter.
I'll do one thing, I will first copy these lines,
paste them again on line number 9,
and comment out lines 5 to 7.
Now I'm commenting these lines
so that you have a reference to that generic method
at a later point in time.
You could then compare how the generic method look like
and how the usage of unbounded wildcards looks like.
So, now on line number 9,
we are going to use wildcard operator.
For that, let's go ahead and change this parameter
to incorporate the wildcard character like that.
Now, the moment you use unbounded wildcards like this
you don't even this T extends boxable bound.
You don't need that.
So, now this method is going to be invoked
with any kind of box, any type of box.
It could be a box of boxable,
box of fruit, box of book, box of apple.
And the only thing that it does inside is getting the count.
So, it does not refer the type parameter
and does not access the boxable bounds fields or methods.
In such situations you can safely use wildcard parameters.
Now, let's go ahead and test out this method,
so we'll go to TestWildcards,
and here let's go ahead and create a box object,
and then create fruit.
So, I'm not going to do that again.
We can just copy that code from our TestBoxGenerics class.
So, I can take lines 5 to 7, copy them,
go to TestWildcards, paste them.
So that we have the book box,
and then we have two objects added to it.
And then we can just go ahead and call the utility method.
So we say, let's put some string,
count of books and then say, BoxUtils.getCountOfItems,
and now the argument that you're passing is the book box.
But it really doesn't matter here
because now we can invoke this get count of items method
using a box of any type.
It could be box of books, box of apple, box of fruit,
box of boxable as well.
This is how you can use unbounded wildcards.
Let us now look at upper bounded wildcards.
Let's recap our discussion
for the hierarchies of type arguments.
We had discussed that just because the class double
is a subclass of the class number
that does not mean that array list of double
becomes a subtype of list of number.
Similarly, just because apple is the subclass
of the class fruit does not mean
that a box of apple is a subtype of box of fruit.
Likewise, a cardboard box of apple
is not a subtype of box of fruit.
This is because the type arguments
that were used in each of these relationships
did not have an exact match for the super and the subtype.
For example, in the first case,
it was number and double, not an exact match.
In the second and the third case it was fruit and apple,
again, not the same.
Which is why none of these relationships is going to work.
Here is a table for a method
with various kinds of parameters
and the corresponding valid arguments that you can pass
when you invoke that method.
Let's say your method has a parameter called box of fruit.
In that case, the only valid argument
that you can pass while invoking that method
is a variable of the type box of fruit.
If your method parameter was box of apple,
then again the valid argument for the invocation
is a variable of box of apple.
So is the case with list of number
and array list of double.
So, here you see that we are facing a kind of a restriction
in order to implement methods with these kind of parameters.
In order to relax those restrictions,
we can use upper bounded wildcards.
They are specified with the help of the extends keyword.
Let's look at all the classes of our box application
and see how we can fit in the upper bounded wildcards there.
This is our hierarchy.
We have an interface boxable,
and then we have two classes fruit and book
which implement the boxable interface.
And then down there, we have another class apple,
that extends fruit.
We are going to write a method
which is called get average weight of a fruit.
If you want to calculate the average weight of a fruit,
we could accept a box of fruit or a box of apple.
But we can't accept a box of boxable or a box of books
because they're not fruits.
So, we will write a method which has a parameter like this.
Box of question mark followed by the extends keyword,
followed by the name of the class fruit.
This is read as box of anything that extends fruit.
And then we can invoke this method with an argument
which is, a box of fruit or a box of apple.
But, box of boxable and box of books
are not valid arguments for this method invocation.
So, now the table that we saw earlier
will change to something like this.
If you have a parameter box of question mark extends fruit,
then the valid argument to invoke that method
will be either a box of fruit or a box of apple.
That is because apple extends fruit,
and the class that we mention
in the extends clause in the parameter,
is inclusive of that limit.
Which is why box of fruit is also valid.
If you have a parameter,
let's say box of question mark extends apple.
Then in that case, there is only one valid argument
which is box of apple.
In case where you have a parameter
let's say a list of question mark extends number,
then the valid arguments will be list of number,
list of integer or list of double or list of float.
And that is because integer, double, float
are subclasses of the class number.
If you have a parameter,
let's say array list of question mark extends double,
then the only valid argument will be array list of double
because we do not have a subclass for the double class.
So, now let's jump back to our IDE
and implement the upper bounded wildcards example
for a box application.
Let's open our Box class
and we'll write a method inside this,
which is get average weight of a fruit.
Let's come on line 35, say public, static
and it's the average weight,
so we'll return a double
and let's name the method get average weight of fruit.
And now the parameter to this will be box,
and I will mention the upper bounded wildcards.
So, question mark extends fruit.
Let's give the parameter a name, let's call it box.
And inside this method,
we are going to just stream the items,
get the weight of every item
and then divide by the number of items.
So, it'll be as simple as doing box.getItems,
stream it using the stream API,
call the map to double function
and get the weight of every item
using the boxable's get weight method.
And we'll use the method references here, get weight.
And then we can invoke the sum method on this
which will calculate the sum for us.
And then we have to divide by the number of items.
So, box.getItems.size.
That is all.
So, the thing to note here is on line number 35,
this parameter is using the upper bounded wildcards.
So, now this method get average weight of fruit
is going to accept any argument
that is a fruit or is a subclass of fruit.
Let's go ahead and test this out in our TestWildcards class.
Before that I'll do a small change,
I'll put a comment here saying
this invocation of count of items
was for unbounded wildcards.
And now let's come on line 15 and put a comment
stating now this is for upper bounded wildcards.
And now let's call the average weight of fruit method.
For that, we need to create a box of let's say fruit,
and add items to it.
So, I'm going to spare us some effort,
run to that TestBoxGenerics class and copy lines 13 to 15,
so that we don't have to do this all over again.
Let's go to the TestWildcards back and paste that code.
So, we have a box of fruit on line 16
and we added two items to it.
Now, let's come on the next line
put a System.out.println, say average weight of fruit
and invoke the get average weight of fruit method,
pass in, the fruit box as an argument.
And if you see this line which is line number 19,
compiles well.
Which means box of fruit is a perfectly valid argument
to invoke the method.
Now let's run this code,
and it should be able to print us the average weight
of the fruit from that fruit box.
So the average weight is 0.4,
given that the weight of both the items was 0.5 and 0.3.
We are not really interested in this average output
as much as we are interested in the argument
that you're trying to pass to the method.
So, box of fruit is totally valid.
Let's do one more thing, let's create a box of apple.
Apple box, and then instantiate this to a box object.
And then let's directly call get average weight of fruit
and pass the apple box.
Note that I have not added any items to the apple box,
it's fine because I'm just trying
to test out the valid arguments for the method invocation.
And if you see line 21 compiles well,
which means the method is okay
to accept an argument of the type box of apple.
Let's go ahead and do something else.
We'll say box of boxable.
Let's create a boxable box,
instantiate this to the box object.
And then let's call box.getAverageWeightOfFruit
and pass the boxable box this time.
Now, if I do that, then I get a compilation problem
which says that the required type
is box of anything that extends fruit.
But you provided box of boxable, and that's right.
Boxable does not extend the fruit class.
Boxable is up the hierarchy of fruit.
So, that is not a valid argument for this invocation.
So, let's comment out this line, this is not going to work.
Let's also do one more thing.
We will in invoke this method again.
And we already have a book box created
at the top of this class,
so we'll pass that and see what happens.
And we get the same problem.
It says that the required type is box of something
that extends fruit,
but you provided box of book.
So, it's the same thing again.
Book is not a class that extends fruit
and that is why it is not a valid argument.
So I'll comment out this line of code as well.
So there we go.
That's how you define upper bounded wildcards in your code.
Let us now look at the third way of using wildcards,
which is the lower bounded wildcards.
This is opposite of what we saw in upper bounded wildcards.
This will help you relax restrictions up the hierarchy.
And these are specified using the super keyword.
Let's again, look at all the classes of our box application
and let's see what example we can implement
to accommodate lower bounded wildcards.
This is our hierarchy as we know.
We will write a method adding apples to a box.
Now, when you add an apple to a box,
that box could be a box of apple,
or a box of fruit or a box of boxable.
But it cannot be a box of books.
Let's implement this using the super keyword
and lower bounded wildcards.
This method will now have a parameter,
which is box of question mark,
followed by the super keyword,
followed by the class name apple.
This method will now accept arguments,
which is, an apple
or anything that is a super type of apple.
So, the valid arguments for this method will be
a box of apple or a box of fruit or a box of boxable.
But box of books is not a valid argument.
Let's go ahead in the IDE and implement this quick example.
So for this, let's open the Box class again
and let's come down here and say public,
we'll write the method, public, static, void
add apple to box.
And this time the method parameter will be box of something
which is a super of apple.
Let's give the parameter a name.
And we are not going to do anything special,
we just have to say box.addItem and add an apple object,
that is all that we are going to do.
So, we'll say Royal Gala,
that's the name of the brand of apples.
Country is, well, it's Sweden,
the color is green and the weight, let's say is 0.2.
So, that is all that we are going to do.
We are just going to take the incoming box argument
and add an apple to that box.
The thing to note here is on line 39, this parameter.
This is using lower bounded wildcards.
This means that this method add apple to box,
can now accept an argument
which is either an apple or any super type of apple.
So let's test this out in the TestWildcards class.
I'll come down and add another comment,
this for lower bounded wildcards.
All right, so now let's go ahead and say,
Box.addAppleToBox and let's pass in an apple box.
And if you see, the code compiles perfectly well
because we passed a box of apple.
This apple box variable is of the type box of apple
that we declared on line number 20.
Let's invoke this another time with a different argument.
Let me pass a box of fruit, like that.
And it still works well.
We have the fruit box passed as an argument,
and fruit box, if you see right up there,
is a variable of the type box of fruit on line number 60.
This works well too.
Let's go ahead and say, Box.addAppleToBox,
and this time we'll pass the boxable box.
Let's see what happens.
Yes, and that works well too.
So, boxable box is a variable that you see on line 22,
which is of the type box of boxable.
So, these three arguments work perfectly well.
You have a box of apple, which is okay.
Box of fruit is okay, and box of boxable is okay.
That is because when we declare the lower bounded wildcards,
anything up the hierarchy of apple is fine.
So, apple is okay, fruit is okay, boxable is okay.
Now let's test this with a box of books as well.
And now if you see, you get a compilation problem.
It says that the required type is something
which is a super of apple,
but you are providing a box of book.
So, box of book or the entity book,
is really not in the hierarchy of the apple class,
and that is why this won't work.
So, let me comment this line of code
because this is not going to compile the code.
So, that is it.
This is how you define unbounded,
upper bounded, lower bounded wildcards.
And note that when we use wildcards,
we've definitely eased the restrictions
that we have on methods with certain types of parameters.